add long article and short reference for join optimization (#17082)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/overview/delta-joins.md

```text
|   query 03 |  query 08 | technique         |
| ----------:|----------:|------------------ |
|  4,173,794 | 7,111,507 | Baseline          |
|  3,416,347 | 6,142,311 | Primary indexes   |
|    174,571 |   141,228 | Secondary indexes |
|     23,240 |         6 | Delta queries     |
```

Each technique comes on-line in response to indexes that you ask Materialize to prepare. **For multiple queries, indexes are a fixed upfront cost with per-dataflow savings for each new query.**

At the end, we'll have a forward-looking discussion of **late-materialization** which can further reduce the memory requirements, in a way that currently requires user assistance (we're working on it!).

## Introducing Joins

Let's take a basic example of an "equi-join":

```sql
-- Collect customer names and states of residence.
SELECT
    customer.name,
    location.state
FROM
    customer,
    location
WHERE

>     customer.zip = location.zip

Reviewer: Let's be very explicit about the join

This approach roughly tracks the resources required by the conventional dataflow processor. So, let's do something smarter.

### Primary Indexes

Each of the TPC-H relations have a **primary key**: a column or set of columns that uniquely identify each record. As discussed above, joins often use primary keys. If we pre-arrange data by its primary key, we might find that we can use those arrangements in the dataflow. This means we may not have to maintain as much per-dataflow state.

Let's build indexes on the primary keys for each collection `query_03` uses. We do this with Materialize's `CREATE INDEX` command.

```sql
CREATE INDEX pk_lineitem ON lineitem (l_orderkey, l_linenumber);
CREATE INDEX pk_customer ON customer (c_custkey);
CREATE INDEX pk_orders ON orders (o_orderkey);
```

{{< note >}}
Notice that `lineitem` doesn't have a single primary key column. Instead, we use a composite primary key consisting of `l_orderkey` and `l_linenumber`.
{{</ note >}}

These indexes have names, though we do not need to use them explicitly. Rather, the columns identified at the end of each line indicate which columns are used as keys for the index. In this case, they are all primary keys.

> We can rebuild our dataflow for `query_03` with these indexes in place. Materialize is able to plan the dataflows based on the available indexes, and may find better plans which maintain less private state. The new dataflow graph will looks like so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these indexes in place, we can rebuild our dataflow for `query_03`. Materialize can plan the dataflows based on the available indexes and may find better plans which maintain less private state. The new dataflow graph will look like so
```

![](https://res.cloudinary.com/mzimgcdn/image/upload/v1665546890/tpch1.webp)

> Notice that some of the places where we had "state" before are now dotted. This indicates that they are not **_new_** state; the state is simply re-used from pre-existing arrangements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that some places where we had "state" before are now dotted. This indicates that they are not **_new_** state; the state is simply re-used from pre-existing indexes.
```

The dataflow for this plan may be mysterious (the `lookup` operator goes unexplained for today) but you can see that all arrangements are now dotted:

![](https://res.cloudinary.com/mzimgcdn/image/upload/v1665546890/tpch3.webp)

You might reasonably be hesitant about the outlay of pre-arranged data required to enable delta queries. We now have five copies of `lineitem` to maintain, and it is not the smallest collection of data. However, the per-query cost is now substantially reduced, and a quite-large number of analysts can each work with a quite large number of queries without exhausting `materialize`.

### Late Materialization

Let's talk about how expensive the arrangements of `lineitem` are.

> Each of these arrangements replicates the full contents of `lineitem`. That is clearly a lot of data, and a lot of redundancy. In a conventional dataflow system this overhead is expected; the `join` operator needs to keep whatever state it needs. But what happens in a more traditional relational database?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these indexes replicates the full contents of `lineitem`. That is clearly a lot of data and a lot of redundancy. You might expect this overhead in a conventional dataflow system; the `join` operator needs to keep whatever state it needs. But what happens in a more traditional relational database
```

Indexes in a relational database don't often replicate the entire collection of data. Rather, they often maintain just a mapping from the indexed columns back to a primary key. These few columns can take substantially less space than the whole collection, and may also change less as various unrelated attributes are updated. This is called **late materialization**.

Can we do this in Materialize? Yes!

> If we are brave enough to rewrite our query just a little bit, we can write the same join in a way that does not require multiple arrangements of `lineitem`. As a reminder, here are the relevant join conditions for `query_03`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we are brave enough to rewrite our query just a little bit, we can write the same join in a way that does not require multiple indexes on top of `lineitem`. As a reminder, here are the relevant join conditions for `query_03`:
```

```sql
CREATE VIEW query_03_optimized AS
SELECT
    o.o_orderkey,
    o.o_orderdate,
    o.o_shippriority,
    sum(l.l_extendedprice * (1 - l.l_discount)) AS revenue
FROM
    customer c,
    orders o,
    lineitem l,
    -- NEW: "narrow" collections containing just primary and foreign keys.
    lineitem_fk_orderkey l_ok,
    orders_fk_custkey o_ck
WHERE
    -- core equijoin constraints using "narrow" collections.
    o_ck.o_custkey = c.c_custkey
    AND l_ok.l_orderkey = o.o_orderkey
    -- connect narrow and wide collections.
    AND o_ck.o_orderkey = o.o_orderkey
    AND l_ok.l_orderkey = l.l_orderkey
    AND l_ok.l_linenumber = l.l_linenumber
    -- constraints on values from wide collections.
    AND c.c_mktsegment = 'BUILDING'
    AND o.o_orderdate < DATE '1995-03-15'
    AND l.l_shipdate > DATE '1995-03-15'
GROUP BY
    o.o_orderkey,
    o.o_orderdate,
    o.o_shippriority;
```

Trigger computation by creating an index on the `query_03_optimized` view.

```sql
CREATE DEFAULT INDEX query_03_optimized_idx ON query_03_optimized;
```

> What happens now in join planning is that "delta query" planning still kicks in. We have all of the necessary arrangements at hand to avoid maintaining intermediate state. The difference is that we only ever use one arrangement for each of the "wide" relations. The relations that must be arranged multiple times are narrow relations whose rows can be substantially smaller. You can confirm you are using a delta join by running `EXPLAIN VIEW query_03_optimized;` and noting that the output contains `type=delta`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What happens now in join planning is that "delta query" planning still kicks in. We have all the necessary indexes to avoid maintaining intermediate state. The difference is that we only ever use one index for each "wide" relation. The relations Materialize must index multiple times are narrow relations whose rows can be substantially smaller. You can confirm you are using a delta join by running `EXPLAIN VIEW query_03_optimized;` and noting that the output contains `type=delta`.
```

> We've still got some work to do on this pattern, in particular automating it so that you needn't rewrite your query. However, I hope it has hinted at the ways in which Materialize can adapt efficient idioms from traditional databases to the data-parallel streaming setting.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think we probably delete this. The docs should reflect the current status and this feels like it only belongs on the blog.
